b'Volume 56, number 3 OPTICS COMMUNICATIONS 1 December 1985 COMPRESSION OF AMPLIFIED CHIRPED OPTICAL PULSES * Donna STRICKLAND and Gerard MOUROU t,ohorurorv /or Lu.trr E~~erget~c.~, Unrrwrrt_v of Recharter, 2.W Eurr R~rrr Roud. Rwhesrer, NY 146XI2YY. USA We have demonstrated the amplification and subsequent recompression of optical chlrped pulses. A system which produces 1.06 pm laser puke& with pulse widths of 2 ps and energies at the millijoule level 1s presented. The onset of self-focusing of intense light pulses limits the amplification of ultra-short laser pulses. A similar problem arises in radar because of the need for short, yet energetic pulses, without having circuits capable of handling the required peak powers. The so- lution for radar transmission is to stretch the pulse by passing it through a positively dispersive delay line before amplifying and transmitting the pulse. The echo is compressed to its original pulse shape by a negatively dispersive delay line [ 11. We wish to report here a system which transposes the technique employed in radar to the optical regime, and that in principle should be capable of producing short (sl ps) pulses with energies at the Joule level. A long pulse is deliberately produced by stretching a short, lowenergy pulse in a single mode optical fiber. The pulse is linearly chirped in the fiber by the com- bination of group velocity dispersion and self-phase modulation [2]. The stretched pulse is amplified and then compressed by a double grating compressor [3]. Amplifying the stretched pulse rather than the com- pressed pulse allows for higher energies to be achieved before self-focusing occurs. The amplification does not appear to affect the chirp linearity and so the \npulses can be fully compressed [4]. A potential bene- fit of amplifying a chirped pulse in an inhomogeneous medium is gain sweeping. In this case, the amplified * This is a corrected version of the paper published in Optics Comm. 55 (1985) 447, where inadvertently a wrong figure was printed as fig. 1, pulse would be free from gain saturation effects, be- cause the frequency varies along the pulsewidth and each frequency component sees gain independently. A schematic diagram of the amplifier and compres- sion system is shown in fig. 1. A CW mode-locked, Nd : YAG laser (Spectra-Physics Series 3000) is used to produce 150 ps \npulses at an 82 MHz repetition rate. Five watts of average power are coupled into 1.4 km of single-mode non-polarization-preserving optical fiber. The fiber (Corning Experimental SMF/DSTM) has a core diameter of 9 w. The average power at the output of the fiber is 2.3 W. The pulses have a rectangular pulseshape with a pulse width of approx- imately 300 ps, \nas can be seen from the autocorrela- tion trace in fig. 2. The bandwidth of the pulses is 50 A. The stretched pulses are injected into a pulsed, Nd : glass, regenerative amplifier, by reflection from an AR coated window. An AR coated window is used to protect the fiber end from being damaged by the retroreflected, amplified pulses. The glass (Kigre Q- 246) is a high gain silicate glass, with a 350 A band- width. The gain of the Nd : glass amplifier peaks at 1.062 pm. A quarter-wave plate frustrates lasing and rejects the injected pulses after two round trips. A pulse is trapped in the cavity, by applying a quarter- wave voltage to the Pockels cell, which then com- pensates for the quarter-wave plate. The Pockels cell is triggered at the peak of the fluorescence. After ap- proximately 100 round trips (1 ~_ls), the Pockels cell is triggered again with a voltage sufficient for half-wave rotation, in order to reject the pulse from the cavity. 0 030-4018/85/$03.30 0 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. (North-Holland Physics Publishing Division) 219 'b'Volume 56, number 3 OPTICS COMMUNICATIONS 1 December 1985 -Grating Compressor l,ig. 1. Amplifier \nand compression system configuration. The energy of the amplified pulse is -2 mJ. The am- plified pulse is transmitted through the AR coated window to a double pass of a double grating com- pressor. The gratings have 1700 Q/mm groove spacing and are used in near Littrow condition. The grating spacing was optimized for maximum compression of the pulses directly from the fiber. The gratings wer-e set at 65 angle of incidence and \nseparated by 25 cm A double pass of the grating system was used to retain a circular beam profile [5]. The energy efficien- cy of the grating compressor is 50%. A pulsewidth of 1 .S ps was achieved as can be seen from the autocorre- lation tract in fig. 3. In previous compression experiments of I .06 pm pulses. shorter fiber lengths were used because maxi- mum power output was desired [6]. In this case. the pulses are amplified in a regenerative amplifier and therefore the losses in the fiber are immaterial. The I&. 2. Autocorrelation of stretched pulse at output of fiber. The pulse is rectangular in shape with a 300 ps pulsewidth. 220 I,@. 3. Autocorrelation of 1.5 ps compressed pulse 'b'Volume 56, number 3 OPTICS COMMUNICATIONS 1 December 1985 c: L r 125ps ---I Fig. 4. Streak camera trace of amplified and compressed pulse with a reflection from an ctalon. Separation between pulses is 125 ps. Pulsewidth is limited by the streak camera response at 2 ps. long fiber lengths required to linearize the chirp can then be used and the pulses can be compressed with- out wings. Regardless of pulse distortion due to spectral and gain saturation of the amplifier, the pulse was com- pressed after amplification, indicating that the \npulse remains linearly chirped. The pulsewidth of the am- plified compressed pulses was measured using a streak camera. Fig. 4 shows \na streak camera trace of a pulse and a reflection from an etalon. The spacing between the two \npulses is 125 ps. \nThe FWHM of the pulse is 2 ps \nwhich is limited by the streak camera response. In the future, we will be improving the mode-lock- ing of the laser, such that the \ninitial pulsewidth is less than 100 ps. \nA pulsewidth of 0.5 ps \ncould then be achieved after compression. Also, we are planning to add successive amplifiers in order to have pulse en- ergies of a few hundred millijoules. Conceivably, this technique could be used to generate subpicosecond pulses, with energies at the Joule level. We will be studying the amplification of these chirped pulses to determine the effects of spectra1 \nand gain saturation, on the chirp linearity. In particu- lar, we will be looking for the effects of gain sweep- ing. It is important to note that this technique can be used to amplify any short pulse, for instance that from a short pulse dye laser. The short pulse can be stretched by the GVD of a single-mode fiber. The pulse can then be amplified and recompressed to its original pulsewidth, in a completely analogous man- ner to the radar transmission. In conclusion, we have shown that by first stretch- ing a chirped optical pulse and then amplifying before compressing, high peak power pulses can be achieved. To date, we have produced 2 ps \npulses with an energy of 1 mJ. The authors wish to thank Steve Williamson for his help in developing the concept as well as Phillipe Bado and Marcel Bouvier for their technical support. We would also like to acknowledge Vienkata Bhaga- vatula of Corning Glass Works for giving us the fiber which made this work possible. This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Inertial Fusion under agreement No. DE-FC08-85DP40200 and by the Laser Fusion Feasibility Project at the Laboratory for Laser Ener- getics which has the following sponsors: Empire State Electric Energy Research Corporation, General Elec- tric Company, New York State Energy Research and Development Authority, Northeast Utilities Service Company, Ontario Hydro, Southern California Edison Company, The standard Oil Company, and the Uni- versity of Rochester. Such support does not imply endorsement of the content by any of the above par- ties. References [l] E. Brookner, Scientific American 252 (1985) 2. [2] B. Nikolaus and D. Grischkowsky, Appl. Phys. Lett. 42 (1983) 1. [3] E.B. Treaty, IEEE J. Quant. Electron. QE-5 (1969) 454. [4] G. Mourou and S. Williamson, Patent Application No. 570,148, filed January 12,1984. [S] J. Desbois, F. Gires and P. Tournois, IEEE J. Quant. Electron. QE-9 (1973) 213. [6] B. Kolner, J.D. Kafka, D.M. Bloom and T.M. Baer, post- deadline paper ThE29-1, Topical Meeting on Ultrafast phenomena, Monterey, California (1984). 221 '